<html>

<head>
	<title>general information</title>
</head>

<body>

	<h1>General Information</h1>

	<h2>Introduction</h2>
	<p>
		This authentication plugin enables users to log in to ICAT via an
		external OpenID Connect (OIDC) identity provider such as <a
		target="_blank" href="https://www.keycloak.org/">Keycloak</a>. Unlike
		other ICAT authentication plugins, it doesn't check the user's
		credentials by itself. Instead, it leaves this part to the identity
		provider (IdP) and relies on a so-called token to actually authenticate
		the user.
	</p>

	<h2>Example authentication flow for TopCAT login</h2>
	<ul>
		<li>Step 1: A user wants to log in to ICAT from a web interface (here
		assumed to be TopCAT) and chooses to do so via OpenID Connect.</li>
		<li>Step 2: The user gets redirected to the IdP.</li>
		<li>Step 3: The user enters their credentials at the IdP.</li>
		<li>Step 4: If the credentials are valid, the user gets redirected back
		to a registered callback URL. Along with the redirection comes an
		authorization code included in the URL.</li>
		<li>Step 5: The authorization code is used to obtain a signed token from
		the IdP.</li>
		<li>Step 6: The authn.oidc plugin takes the token as input and verifies
		its signature. If the token is valid, authn.oidc extracts the ICAT
		username from the token and returns it.</li>
		<li>Step 7: The ICAT server creates a session for the user that can be
		used for TopCAT.</li>
	</ul>
	<p>
		Note that the authn.oidc plugin is only responsible for step 6. The
		other steps require some more work on your end.
	</p>

	<h2>Work items needed for the above authentication flow</h2>
	<ul>
		<li>To enable step 1, you need to add a corresponding link or button to
		the login page of TopCAT.</li>
		<li>For the steps 2 and 5, you must put in place a service that handles
		the communication with the IdP to obtain the token.</li>
		<li>In steps 6 and 7, you have to use the token to log in to ICAT via
		the authn.oidc authenticator on behalf of the user. You then have to
		store the obtained ICAT session in the Browser's session storage such
		that TopCAT can make use of it.</li>
	</ul>

	<h2>Types of tokens</h2>
	<p>
		OpenID Connect defines (among others) two types of tokens: The access
		token and the identity token. By definition, the identity token is
		always a so-called JSON Web Token (JWT). While the access token does not
		have such a strictly defined format, some identity providers (including
		Keycloak) also issue access tokens in the JWK format as well. Note,
		however, that this is not required.
	</p>
	<p>
		The authn.oidc plugin accepts any token that uses the JWT format. It
		doesn't matter whether this is an access token or an identity token.
		What matters is that the token must include a claim with the ICAT
		username to identify the user.
	</p>

</body>

</html>